HP CHESS - BCS version

This is the chess game from CSL 2001 x167, modified for BCS.
No actual code changes were made. To make work for BCS I appended the
two ALGOL source files together and added ,B to the compile line so
it would actually output code. Fortunately it compiled without errors.
For the assembly file I separated into 5 sections, added ,B to each
assembly line and changed RRR RRL and SWP instructions to octal,
the SIO extasmb assembler does not support extended instructions.
Linked everything together with a custom 31KW BCS linker.. TTY=slot 11.
Amazingly it seems to work! As with all stock BCS programs, CRLF
is required for input, if terminal only outputs CR press control-J
to satisfy it, or for SIMH HP2100 at the sim prompt: set tty autolf

8/18/07 initial conversion by WTN
1/13/08 corrected RRR 8 instruction in chess3.asm

Building notes...

The mkchess.sim file is the SimH HP2100 script used to build the initial
31.4K chessbcs.abs binary. The script is written to process the chess
asm and alg source files in the "chess" directory, and requires the
following tool files exist the "bin" directory...

sio.abs - a version of sio16k11.abs patched to use tty=11, ptr=12, ptp=13
bcs31k.abs - a prepared BCS system for 31KW memory and above slots
extasmb.abs - the assembler
algol.abs - the algol compiler

Instructions for preparing the sio.abs and bcs31k.abs files are at:
http://www.infionline.net/~wtnewton/oldcomp/hpgames/bcs31k_log.txt
Modify the procedures (and the mkchess.sim script) if preparing
for different slot assignments.

The BCS-produced binary requires that memory below 3300 be clear or it
prints INDEX? and halts. To avoid this the 25.2K chess.abs binary was made
by importing chessbcs.abs to a HP-IPL/OS disk file by attaching it to PTR
and entering "@ CHESS" ABS2F at the ? prompt, then entering "@ CHESS" F2ABS
answering Y to the prompts, attaching PTP to chess.bcs at the sim prompt
and continuing to punch the file. A similar procedure can be used with a
non-disk systems using a HP-IPL/OS binary containing the "altutil" and
"fcam" packages (such as the hposmt6i.abs build presently in the ide dir
of hpiplos_main.zip - press space when booting - subject to change),
use ZAM ABSLOAD to load the BCS-produced binary from PTR into alt mem
then use AM2ABS to punch the "fixed" binary to PTP.

- Terry
