                            FORTRAN COMPILATION DIAGNOSTICS

Errors detected in the source program are indicated by a numeric code inserted
before or after the statement in the list output.

The format is as follows:

    E-eeee: ssss + nnnn

    eeee    The error diagnostic code shown below.

    ssss    The statement label of the statement in which the error
            was detected. In unlabeled, 0000 is typed.

    nnnn    Ordinal number of the erroneous statement following the
            last labeled statement. (Comment statements are not in-
            cluded in this count.)

Error
Code    Description

0001    Statement label error:

        a) The label is in positions other than 1-5.
        b) A character in the label is not numeric.
        c) The label is not in the range 1-9999.
        d) The label is doubly defined.
        e) The label indicated is used in a GO TO, DO, or IF state-
           ment or in an I/O operation to name a FORMAT state-
           ment, but it does not appear in the label field for any
           statement in the program (printed after END).

0002    Unrecognized statement:

        a) The statement being processed is not recognized as a
           valid statement.
        b) A specifications statement follows an executable state-
           ment.
        c) The specification statements are not in the following order:

                DIMENSION
                COMMON
                EQUIVALENCE

        d) A statement function precedes a specifications statement
           or follows an executable statement.

0003    Parenthesis error: There are an unequal number of left and
        right parentheses in a statement.

0004    Illegal character or format:

        a) A statement contains a character other than A through Z,
           0 through 9, or space = + - / ( ) , . $ " .
        b) A statement does not have the proper format.
        c) A control statement is missing, misspelled, or does not
           have the proper format.

A-1

Error
Code    Description

0005    Adjacent operators: An arithmetic expression contains ad-
        jacent arithmetic operators

0006    Illegalsubscript: A variable name is used both as a simple
        variable and a subscripted variable.

0007    Doubly defined variable:

        a) A variable name appears more than once in a COMMON
           statement.
        b) A variable name appears more than once in a DIMENSION
           statement.
        c) A variable name appears more than once as a dummy
           argument in a statement function.
        d) A program, subroutine, or function name appears as a
           dummy parameter or in a specifications statement.
        e) A subroutine or program name appears as a variable
           within the program.

0008    Too many parameters: The dummy parameters for a sub-
        routine or function exceed 63.

0009    Invalid arithmetic expression:

        a) Missimg operator.
        b) Illegal replacement.

0010    Mixed mode expression: Integer constants or variables ap-
        pear in an arithmetic expression with real constants or var-
        iables.

0011    Invalid subscript:

        a) Subscript is not an integer constant, integer variable, or
           legal subscript expression.
        b) There are more than two subscripts (i.e., more than two
           dimensions).
        c) Two subscripts appear for a variable which has been de-
           fined with one dimension only.
  
0012    Invalid constant:

        a) An integer constant is not in the range of 2**15 to 2**15-1.
        b) A real constant is not in the approximate range of 10**38
           to 10**-38.
        c) A constant contains an illegal character.

0013    Invalid EQUIVALENCE statement:

        a) Two or more of the variables appearing in an EQUTVA-
           LENCE statement are also defined in the COMMON block.
        b) The variables contained in an EQUIVALENCE cause the
           origin of COMMON to be altered.
        c) Contradictory equivalence; or equivalence between two
           or more arrays conflicts with a previously established
           equivalence.

A-2

Error
Code    Description

0014    Table overflow: Too many variables and statement labels
        appear in the program.

0015    Invalid DO loop:

        a) The terminal statement of a DO loop does not appear in
           the program or appears prior to the DO statement.
        b) The terminal statement of a nested DO loop is not within
           the range of the outer DO loop.
        c) DO loops are nested more than 10 deep.
        d) Last statement in a loop is a GO TO, arithmetic IF, RE-
           TURN, STOP, PAUSE, or DO.
        e) An indexing parameter is not an unsigned integer constant
           or simple integer variable or is specified as zero.

0016    Statement function name is doubly defined.

0017    A tape write error has occurred while producing interme-
        diate code output during Pass 1.

A-3
