                                 FORTRAN


DESCRIPTION

The FORTRAN compiler system translates a symbolic source program written
according to American Standard Basic FORTRAN specifications into a relocatable
object program which can be loaded and executed under control of the Basic
Control System.

The FORTRAN Compiler accepts as input paper tape containing a control statement
and a source language program. The output produced by the Compiler may include
a punched paper tape containing the object program; a listing of the source
language program with diagnostic messages, if any; and a listing of the object 
in program assembly level language.

CONTROL STATEMENT

The control statement specifies the output to be produced; it must be the first
statement of the source program.

                  FTN, p1, p2, p3

FTN is a free field control statement. Following the comma are one to three 
parameters, in any order, which define the output to be produced. The control 
statement must be terminated by an end-of-statement mark, (CR)(LF). Spaces 
embedded in the statement are ignored.

The parameters may be a combination of the following: I

        B   Binary output: A program is to be punched in
            relocatable binary format suitable for loading
            by the Basic Control System loader.

        L   List output: A listing of the source language
            program is to be produced during Pass One.

        A   Assembly listing: A listing of the object program 
            in assembly level language is to be produced
            in the last pass.

SOURCE PROGRAM

The source program follows the control statement. Each statement is followed by
the end-of-statement mark, (CR)(LF). Specifications statements must precede
executable statements. The last statement in each program submitted for compila-
tion must be an END statement. Up to five source programs may be compiled at
one time. The last program must be followed by an END$ statement, if less than
six programs are to be compiled. (For complete details see FORTRAN Program-
mer's Reference manual.)

The control statement, each of the five programs, and the END$ terminator may be
submitted on a single tape or on separate tapes. If more than five programs are
contained on a tape, the compiler processes the first five and halts with the T-
Register containing 102077. The remaining programs must be compiled separately.

BINARY OUTPUT

The punch output produced by the compiler is a relocatable binary program. It does
not include system subroutines introduced by the compiler, or library subroutines
referred to in the program.


5-1
OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS

The exact operating procedures for a compilation depend on the available 
hardware configuration.

One possible allocation of equipment might be as follows:

     Compiler           Standard Unit         Physical Unit
   Input/Output          Designation           Assignment 
  
   Binary output        Punch Output          2753A Tape Punch

   List output          Teleprinter Output    2752A Teleprinter

   Assembly listing     Teleprinter Output    2752A Teleprinter

   Source Tape(s)       Input 2737A           Punched Tape Reader

If there are two output devices as shown above, there are two passes (8K memory)
or four passes (4K memory). The list output and an intermediate binary tape are
both produced during the first pass; the assembly listing and the binary output 
are both produced during the last pass.

If one output device is available list output and intermediate binary output are
written on the same tape during the first pass (the Compiler ignores the list 
output when reading the binary data during the second pass). The Binary output 
is then produced in the next to the last pass; and the assembly listing, in the 
last pass.

PAPER TAPE SYSTEM

The following procedures indicate the sequence of steps for compilation of a 
source program: 

A. Set Teleprinter to LINE and check that all equipment to be used is operable. 
   If the Teleprinter is the only output device, turn ON punch unit.

B. Load FORTRAN Pass 1 using the Basic Binary Loader.

C. If the System Input/Output (SIO) subroutines are on a tape which is separate
   from FORTRAN Pass 1, load the tape using the Basic Binary Loader.

D. Set Switch Register to starting address of FORTRAN Pass 1: 000100

E. Press LOAD ADDRESS.

F. Place source language tape in device serving as the Standard Input unit (e.g.,
   Punched Tape Reader).

G. Press RUN.

H. If more than one source tape, repeat Steps F and G for each tape.

I. Perform either of the following depending on memory size:

    4K Memory

    1. At end of Pass 1 (T-Register contains 102077) load Pass 2 using the Basic
       Binary Loader.

    2. Remove binary output from Standard Punch device and place in device serv-
       ing as the Standard Input unit. (If only one output device, both binary 
       and list output are on the same tape.)

5-2
   3. Set Switch Register to: 000100

   4. Press LOAD ADDRESS.

   5. Press RUN.

   6. At end of Pass 2 (T-Register contains 102077), load Pass 3 using the Basic
      Binary Loader.

   7. Remove binary output from Standard Punch device and place in device serv-

      ing as Standard Input unit.

   8. Set Switch Register to: 000100

   9. Press LOAD ADDRESS.

   10. Press RUN.

   11. At end of Pass 3 (T-Register contains 102077), load Pass 4 using the Basic
       Binary Loader.

   12. Remove binary output from Standard Punch device and place in device serv-
       ing as Standard Input unit.

   13. Set Switch Register to: 000100

   14. Press LOAD ADDRESS.

   15. Press RUN.

   16. At end of Pass 4, the relocatable binary object tape is on the Standard 
       Punch unit. Either of the following conditions may exist:

       a.  If the T-Register contains 102077, the compilation is complete. If an
           assembly listing was requested, it is on the List Output device.

       b.  If the T-Register contains 102001, an assembly listing pass is to be
           performed:

           (1) Place binary output from Pass 3 in deyice serving as Standard In-
               put unit. (Turn off Teleprinter punch unit.)

           (2) Press RUN.

           (3) At end of listing pass, T-Register contains 102077.

    8K Memory

    1.  At end of Pass 1(T-Register contains 102077), load Pass 2 using the Basic
        Binary Loader.

    2.  Remove binary output from Standard Punch device and place in device serv-
        ing as the Standard Input unit. (If only one output device, both binary and
        list output are on the same tape.)

    3.  Set Switch Register to: 000100

    4.  Press LOAD ADDRESS


5-3

    5.  Press RUN.

    6.  At end of Pass 2, the relocatable binary object tape is on the Standard 
        Punch unit. Either of the following conditions may exist:

        a.  If the T-Register contains 102077, the compilation is complete. If an
            assembly listing was requested, it is on the List Output device.

        b.  If the T-Register contains 102001, an assembly listing pass is to be
            performed:

            (1) Place binary output from Pass 1 in device serving as Standard In-
                put unit. (Turn off Teleprinter punch unit.)

            (2) Press RUN.

            (3) At end of listing pass, T-Register contains 102077.


MAGNETIC TAPE SYSTEM

Following are the steps for a compilation when using a magnetic tape system:

A.  Set Teleprinter to LINE and check that all equipment to be used is operable. 
    If the Teleprinter is the only output device, turn ON punch unit. 

B.  Load FORTRAN Pass 1 using the Magnetic Tape Binary Loader.

C.  Place source language tape in device serving as the Standard Input unit.

D.  Press RUN.

E.  At the end of compilation, the relocatable binary object tape is on the 
    Standard Punch unit. Either of the following conditions may exist:

    1.  If the T-Register contains 102077, the assembly listing was requested and
        is on the List Output device.

    2.  If the T-Register contains 102001, an assembly listing pass is to be per-
        formed. Turn off Teleprinter punch unit. Press RUN.


5-4
                        BASIC CONTROL SYSTEM LOADER
                       OPERATING PROCEDURES SUMMARY

The Basic Control System Loader is used to load the object programs generated
by FORTRAN and any referenced library routines. Listed below is a summary
of procedures for normal loading of relocatable object programs and library
routines (and for the printing of a Memory Allocation Listing):t

1. Load the Basic Control System tape using the Basic or Magnetic Tape
   Binary Loader.

2. Set Switch Register to 000002, press LOAD ADDRESS, and set Switch Reg-
   ister to 000000.

3. Place FORTRAN generated relocatable object tape in Standard Input unit.

4. Press RUN. The loader types "LOAD" it expects another relocatable or li-
   brary program.

5. If more than one relocatable object tape is to be loaded, repeat Steps 3 and
   4 for each. Otherwise set Switch Register to 000004 to load library rou-
   tines.

6. Place Program Library tape in device serving as Program Library unit.

7. Press RUN. When the loading operation is complete, the loader types
   "*LST". Press RUN. The Loader types "*RUN" indicating the program is
   ready for execution.


HALTS

 During the operation of the Compiler, the following halts may occur:

T-Register          Explanation                   Action

 102000           Memory overflow: the pro-     Irrecoverable error, pro-
                  gram is too long.             gram must be revised.

 102001           End of binary object tape     If only one output device,
                  output, start of assembly     place intermediate binary
                  listing.                      in Standard Input unit and
                                                press RUN.

 102007           For all passes except first,  If punch error, restart with
                  unrecognizable record on      Pass 1.
                  intermediate binary tape:     If wrong tape, restart cur-
                                                rent pass.

                  1) Punch error on previous    a) Load FORTRAN pass.
                     pass.                      b) Set Switch Register to
                  2) Wrong tape supplied as        000100.
                     input for pass.            c) Press LOAD ADDRESS.
                                                d) Place previous binary
                                                   tape in input device.
 

 t See Chapter 3 for details and options.

5-5


T-Register          Explanation                   Action 

 102010           External Symbol Table         Irrecoverable error; pro-
                  overflow; the number of       gram must be revised.
                  external symbols exceeds
                  255.

 102011           Checksum error.               Attempt to re-read record
                                                (binary records are sepa-
                                                rated by 4 feed frames).
                                                Pass 1.

 102017           A tape write error has oc-    Restart with beginning of
                  curred during Pass 1.         Pass 1.

 102027           A tape read error has oc-     Restart with beginning of
                  curred during Pass 2.         Pass 1.

 102066           Tape supply low on 2753A      Load new tape and press
                  Tape Punch.                   RUN.
     
 102077           Normal end of pass or         Proceed as indicated in
                  compilation                   above steps.


Diagnostic messages or halts might also occur for the following:

  Operation             System                        Reference

Loading FORTRAN       Basic Binary Loader           Chapter 1
compiler or SIO       Magnetic Tape Binary          Chapter 2
tapes                 Loader

FORTRAN               FORTRAN                       Appendix A
compilation

Loading object        BCS Relocating                Chapter 3 
programs and          Loader
library routines

Executing I/O         I/O system (FRMTR)            Appendix D
operations
during running
of object program

Executing Basic       Program Library               Appendix E
External Functions
during running of
object program






 5-6

