                               MAGNETIC TAPE SYSTEM

The Magnetic Tape System provides the capability to store the standard software
systems and user programs on an HP 2020A/B Magnetic Tape unit and to access
them through a simple loading procedure. The same magnetic tape is also utilized
by the software systems for temporary storage of intermediate or scratch files.
Auxiliary routines are provided to perform the following functions:

1. Configure SIO drivers and magnetic tape Inter-Pass Loader.

2. Create the absolute and relocatable (Program Library) files on magnetic
   tape.

3. Exchange the magnetic tape loader for the paper tape loader (Basic Bi-
   nary Loader).

4. Exchange the paper tape loader for the magnetic tape loader.

The minimum configuration for Magnetic Tape System operation is:

        HP 2116A or 2115A Computer with 8K memory

        HP 2752A Teleprinter

        HP 2737A Punched Tape Reader

        HP 2020A/B Magnetic Tape Unit

ALLOCATION OF FILES

The tape consists of two files with the remaining portion used as a scratch file or
area.

   --------------------------------------------------------------------
  | File 1 (Absolute)    | File 2 (Program Library)    | Scratch ...
   --------------------------------------------------------------------

File 1 is the Absolute File; it may contain any program in absolute binary fcrmat:

The four standard software systems may be configured for magnetic tape input/
output: FORTRAN, Assembler, Basic Control System and Cross Reference Gen-
erator.

Standard Software systems configured for paper tape input/output: FORTRAN, As-
sembler Basic Control System, Symbolic Editor, etc.

Any user programs in absolute form.

Exchange Magnetic for Paper Tape Loader program (reguired to re-load Basic Bi-
nary Loader when absolute programs are to be loaded from paper tape).


8-1

The format of a File 1 record is as follows:

Tape                 Computer Word
Format               Equivalent                   Content
------               -------------                -------
                          1                       Record length in com-
                                                  puter words (excluding
                                                  words 1-3)

                          2                       Absolute starting ad-
                                                  dress of program
[IMAGE]
                          3                       Program identification
                                                  number (0 for continu-
                                                  ation record)

                         4-n                      Absolute binary pro-
                                                  gram (n-3 = record
                                                  length)


When constructing File 1, the user supplies an identification number in the range 1
to 177776 for each program. If the program consists of more than one paper tape
(e.g., SIO routines or the Inter-Pass Loader reguired), a 0 is supplied as the iden-
tification number for each continuation tape.

File 2 is named the Library File. It contains relocatable programs. IncIuded are
the standard Program Library routine,and any relocatable programs added by the
user. The Record formats are identical to the paper tape library program.

The scratch area is used by the Assembler and by FORTRAN for intermediate stor-
age of the user's program during assembly or compilation. The scratch area could
also be used by the user's object program during execution.

CONFIGURING THE SOFTWARE

Prior to the preparation of File 1, FORTRAN, the Assembler, the Cross-Reference
Generator, and the Basic Control System must be configured for use with magnetic
tape. BCS is configured through standard Prepare Control System processing; the
HP 2020 BCS driver is included and the tape unit is designated as the Program
Library unit. (Note that the 2020 driver requires that two interrupt entry points be
specified: I.21 for the data channel, and C.21 for the command channel.)

The other programs are configured through use of the magnetic tape version of the
System Input/Output (SIO) Dump routine. t  Any of three methods may be used:

1. A complete configured tape may be prepared for each system. The
   identification number assigned during prepare Tape System processing
   is then entered to locate and load the entire system (see MAGNETIC TAPE
   SYSTEM PREPARATION). Use of this method results in the most effi-
   cient loading operation.

   For the magnetic tape version of FORTRAN, the output paper tape would
   contain Pass 1 of FORTRAN; the Teleprinter, Tape Punch (if required
   by the installation), Punched Tape Reader, and Magnetic Tape Unit

-------------------
t Systems which are to be configured for paper tape usage should also be processed
  by the magnetic tape version of the SIO Dump routine; more efficient loading from
  magnetic tape results.

8-2
   drivers; and the Inter-Pass Loader. For magnetic tape versions of the
   Assembler and the Cross-Reference Generator, only the required drivers
   would be added. (Note: The Assembler must be loaded before the
   Magnetic Tape Unit driver.)

2. A separate tape may be prepared for each required combination of SIO
   subroutines. The subroutine tape would then be attached as a continuation
   record of the system. This method reduces the amount of SIO Dump
   routine processing while still allowing each system to be called by one
   identification number only. Loading efficiency, however, is somewhat
   reduced.

3. A separate tape may be prepared for each required combination of SIO
   subroutines as in the above method. Each subroutine tape, however,
   would then be stored on magnetic tape as a complete program with its
   own identification number. This method allows increased flexibility and
   also uses the least amount of tape. Since two identification numbers
   must be entered and two programs loaded, it does reduce overall loading
   efficiency. 

MAGNETIC TAPE SYSTEM PREPARATION 

The tape is created through use of the Prepare Tape System routine.  For each
program in File 1, the user supplies an identification number in the range 1 to 
17776. (The number 177777 is reserved for Pass 2 of FORTRAN.) This number
should be noted since it must be entered into the Switch Register in order to locate
the program on the tape.  If the program to be transferred to magnetic tape is a
continuation record of another program, a zero is specified as the identification
number.
The user must also specify the absolute starting address of each program. This 
number is usually 2 or 100. The Basic Control System and absolute programs 
generated by the Basic Control System have starting addresses of 2. All other
standard software systems have starting addresses of 100. If a tape containing con-
figured SIO drivers is stored as a separate program, a starting address of 100 is
used.
The Prepare Tape System reads each absolute binary program from the paper tape 
input device, stores it on the magnetic tape, and requests the next identification
number. When all File 1 programs are processed, the Prepare Tape System is
ready to process relocatable programs for File 2. The Program Library is copied
from the paper tape input device to the magnetic tape. The user may add other
relocatable programs to File 2; if user programs are referenced more frequently
or if they contain a number of references to library routines, they should precede
the Program Library on tape. To terminate the loading of relocatable programs.
Switch 15 of the Switch Register is set up following the message "LOAD."

USING THE TAPE SYSTEM

In order to user the Magnetic Tape System, the Magnetic Tape Binary Loader must
be stored in the protected area of memory. This is accomplished by the Exchange
Paper for Magnetic Tape Loader program (see page 8-7).  With the Magnetic Tape
Binary Loader in memory, the user sets the identification number of the absolute
program into the Switch Register. The Loader searches for the routine and loads it.
To initiate execution, the user presses the RUN switch.

Assembler Processing

When using the Extended Assembler with magnetic tape, the user submits the
source language program one time only. The Assembler copies the program onto
the scratch area of the tape during the first pass. At the end of the first pass, the
Symbol Table is printed on the Teleprinter (if that option was selected). To initiate
the second pass, the tape is backspaced to the beginning of the scratch area making
the source program again available for processing. The second pass is performed
and the output produced on the punch and list device requested.

8-3
FORTRAN Processing 

The FORTRAN Compiler operating with magnetic tape uses the scratch area for
storage of intermediate binary code. Pass 1 of FORTRAN writes the intermediate
program. At the end of Pass 1, FORTRAN calls the Inter-Pass Loader; it searches
for and loads Pass 2 of FORTRAN. (Pass 2 is identified by the number 177777
which is reserved for this purpose. ) Pass 2 spaces forward to the scratch area,
processes the intermediate code and produces output on the punch and list devices
as requested.

Inter-Pass Loader 

The Inter-Pass Loader is used to locate and load the second pass of FORTRAN.
It must be configured with the other SIO routines through use of the SIO Dump
routine. During this processing, it requires specification of the channel number
(lower) af the Magnetic Tape Unit.

The Inter-Pass Loader may also be used by any absolute program to locate program
segments on magnetic tape and load them in memory overlaying program segments
that have already been executed.

The request to read in a new segment is initiated by performing a JMP instruction
with the A-Register containing the identification number of the program segment to
be loaded. (The number is assigned to the program segment during Prepare Tape
System processing. ) When the new program has been located and loaded, the Inter-
Pass Loader passes control to it via a JMP 3,I.

The calling sequence of the program segment initially in memory is:

      LDA <identification>             Where <identification is an octal
      JMP 6,I                          number in the range 1-177776.

The first instructions of the program segment to be loaded by the Inter-Pass Loader
might be:

      ORG 3
      DEF <start of program segment>

The Inter-Pass Loader resides in the area 6, X6322 - X6420 (X depends on the size
of memory and is always in the last page of memory) and must not be overlaid by
new program segments.

Basic Control System Processing 

The Basic Control System may be configured to process the Program Library from
magnetic tape. When Switch 2 is set up (after the user's relocatable program has
been loaded from a paper tape device), it will search File 2 for library routines
referenced in the user's program. If, at the end of searching forward through this
file, there exist unmatched references (external references for which no entry
points could be located), a list of these references is printed on the Teleprinter.
If these routines are on magnetic tape (e.g., a user program near the end of the file
referring to a library routine near the beginning of the file), Switch 2 is left in
up position and the RUN switch is pressed; BCS repeats the search of the Library
file. If the routines are on paper tape, Switch 2 is set down, the tape placed in the
paper tape device, and the RUN switch is pressed. Any number of user programs
may be entered via a paper tape device after the library routines have been loaded.

PAPER TAPE OPERATION 

The paper tape loader (Basic Binary Loader) can be restored in the protected area
of memory through use of the Exchange Magnetic for Paper Tape Loader program.
The Exchange Magnetic for Paper Tape Loader program must be stored as part of
the Absolute file on magnetic tape.

8-4
PREPARE TAPE SYSTEM OPERATING PROCEDURES

Before initiating the preparation of the files on magnetic tape, the Prepare Tape
System must be configured; the user supplies the I/O channel numbers for the
available devices.

Configuring The Software Systems

The SIO routines, the Inter-Pass Loader and the Basic Control System must be
configured prior to being stored as part of File 1. For procedures to configure the
SIO routines and the Inter-Pass Loader, see the SIO Dump routine. For procedures
to configure BCS, see the Prepare Control System Routine.

Configuring The Prepare Tape System Routine

1. Load the PTS routine using the Basic Binary Loader.

2. Set Switch Register to:  000100

3. Press LOAD ADDRESS

4. Set Switches 5-0 of the Switch Register to the channel number for the printer/
   punch unit (the lower numbered of the two assigned channels) of the Teleprinter.

5. Press RUN.

6. The computer prints:

        HSINPUT

7. Type channel number of Punch Tape Reader. The reply is terminated by a (CR)(LF).

8. The computer prints:

        MAG TAPE

9. Type the channel number of the data channel (the lower numbered of the two
   assigned channels) of the Magnetic Tape Unit. The reply is terminated by a
   (CR)(LF).

10. The computer prints:

        LWA MEM?

11. Type in the upper limit of available memory; for an 8K configuration, type:

        17677

Preparing The Magnetic Tape Files

1. Following the type-in of the last word address of available memory, the com-
   puter prints:

        I.D.

2. Type in the program identification number (1-17777) starting in position l. f
   If the tape to be loaded is a continuation tape of the tape that was loaded pre-
------------------
t An absolute program may be added to the end of a previously prepared File 1:
  Type /A in response to "I.D." The tape is positioned at the end of the file 
  and a new ID number requested. (The previously prepared File 2 will be 
  destroyed and must therefore be recreated.)

8-5
   viously, (e.g., SIO drivers and Inter-Pass Loader) type an identification num-
   ber of "0". Comments may be appended to the ID number (to the end of the
   line) providing a space separates the comments from the number. The reply
   is terminated by a (CR(LF).

3. The computer prints:

        S.A.

4. Type in the absolute starting address of the program (usually 2 or 100). Com-
   ments may be appended providing a space separates the comments from the
   address. The reply is terminated by a (CR)(LF).

5. The computer prints:

        LOAD

6. Place the paper tape in the input device and press RUN.

7. Repeat steps 1 through 6 for each absolute tape (steps 3 and 4 are bypassed for
   continuation tape.)

8. To terminate input for File 1, type:

        /E (CR)(LF)

   in response to "I.D."

9. The computer prints:

        LIBRARY FILE
        LOAD

10. Place the Program Library tape in the input device and press RUN. (Switch
    15 should be down).

11. When the Program Library is stored on the tape in File 2, the computer prints:

        LOAD

12. The user may then load any relocatable programs that are to be added in File
    2. $ After each program is loaded, the computer prints:

        LOAD

13. To terminate input for File 2, set Switch 15 up. The computer prints:

        *END

    and rewinds the magnetic tape.

----------------
$ If user program refers to library routines, or if they are accessed more fre-
  quently, they should be loaded first.

8-6
During operation of Prepare Tape System, the following diagnostics may be printed
on the Teleprinter:

  Message              Explanation                 Action
   
*EOT                   End-of-Tape                 Use larger tape or fewer pro-
                                                   grams. Start over.

*ADDRESS ERROR         The program being writ-     Reposition tape, then press RUN
                       ten on tape would de-       to reread record,otherwise re-
                       story the loader if load-   start.
                       ing attempted.

INPUT ERROR,           Identification is illegal.  Retype identification number.
TRY AGAIN

WRITE NOT              Write Enable Ring not in-   Insert ring and start over.
ENABLED                serted in reel.

TAPE UNIT IN                                       Press AUTO button.  Then press
LOCAL                                              RUN to continue.

CHECKSUM ERROR          Checksum error occur-      Reposition paper tape at begin
                        red while reading paper    ning of record (indicated by
                        tape                       four feed frames) and press
                                                   RUN. Otherwise, restart.

Loading Magnetic Tape Binary Loader 

Prior to loading absolute programs from magnetic tape, the paper tape loader (Basic
Binary Loader) must be exchanged forthe Magnetic Tape Binary Loader. The steps
are as follows:

1. Load Exchange Paper for Magnetic Tape Loader program using the Basic
   Binary Loader.

2. Set Switch Register to starting address of the routine:

        000002

3. Press LOAD ADDRESS.

4. Set Switches 5-0 of the Switch Register to the channel number of the data chan-
   nel (the lower numbered of the two assigned channels) of the magnetic tape unit.

5. Set Loader switch to ENABLED.

6. Press RUN.

7. When the computer halts with 102077 in the T-Register, the Basic Binary
   Loader has been replaced with the Magnetic Tape Binary Loader.

8. Set Loader switch to PROTECTED.

8-7
Loading Absolute Programs From Magnetic Tape

1. Set Switch Register to starting address of Magnetic Tape Loader. For 8K
   configuration, use 017700.

2. Press LOAD ADDRESS

3. Set absolute program identification number in the Switch Register. (Make sure
   tape unit is in "AUTO" mode and the proper density has been selected.)

4. Press PRESET.

5. Set Loader switch to ENABLED

6. Press RUN.

7. The computer halts at location 1 with 102077 in the T-Register. The program
   has been located and loaded.

8. Set Loader switch to PROTECTED.

9. Press RUN to initiate execution of the absolute program.

If the computer halts with 10211 in the T-Register, a locating or loading error has
occurred. If the A-Register contains 000200, the requested program can not be
located; set correct number in Switch Register and repeat procedure. If the A-
Register does not contain 000200, a tape read error (timing or parity) has occurred;
restart at step 1.

Restoring The Basic Binary Loader 

To load absolute binary programs from paper tape, the Magnetic Tape Binary Loader
must be exchanged for the Basic Binary Loader. The steps are as follows:

1. Set Switch Register to starting address of Magnetic Tape Loader. For 8K
   configuration, use 017700.

2. Press LOAD ADDRESS.

3. Set File 1 identification number of the Exchange Magnetic for Paper Tape
   Loader program in the Switch Register.

4. Press PRESET.

5. Set Loader switch to ENABLED.

6. Press RUN.

7. The computer halts with 102077 in the T-Register. Set switches 5-0 of the
   Switch Register to the channel number of the paper tape input device.

8. Let Loader switch remain in ENABLED position.

9. Press RUN.

8-8

10. The computer halts with 102077 in the T-Register indicating that the Basic
    Loader has replaced the Magnetic Tape Binary Loader. Set Loader switch to
    PROTECTED.

11. To recopy the Basic Binary Loader in the protected area (e.g., an incorrect
    channel number was entered), leave Loader switch in ENABLED position and
    RUN. The program returns to Step 7.

8-9
